---
layout: default
title:  "Modern C++ shenanigans with Vertices in OpenGL!"
---

Recommended Modern C++ (C++11 and later) topics to review before reading: lambdas, range-based for loops, return type deduction, variadic templates, `constexpr` (and extended) functions, `using` alias, `type_traits`, inline variables, constexpr if...

For those who are new to graphics programming, understanding the concept of an OpenGL "Vertex" might take longer than learning it from 10th Grade Geometry class. Ask your "Average Joe" what the definition of a "Vertex" and you'll likely get a response along the lines of "some pointy spot on a shape". While this is not at all wrong, in a graphics programming context, there's much more to that than the relative positions within a geometry.

In OpenGL, we can apply arbitrary properties or "attributes" to each vertex of a geometry. Today we will just consider three properties: positions of the vertices on the geometry, their normals, and also their coordinate mapping on a 2D image that we'll use as a texture. When we supply the raw data, we also need to tell OpenGL how the data should be interpreted. Fortunately, OpenGL has a nifty function called `glVertexAttribPointer` that we can call to accomplish this.

```cpp
void glVertexAttribPointer(
  GLuint index,
  GLint size,
  GLenum type,
  GLboolean normalized,
  GLsizei stride,
  const GLvoid * pointer);
```

(I won't go over the details of the parameters because they are described here: https://www.khronos.org/registry/OpenGL-Refpages/gl4/html/glVertexAttribPointer.xhtml)

Eventually, we want to take each property and call it like:

```
for (const auto& property : properties) {
  glEnableVertexAttribArray(property.index);
  glVertexAttribPointer(property.index, property.size,
                        property.type, property.normalized,
                        property.stride, reinterpret_cast<GLvoid*>(offset));
}
```

This gives us a little glimpse of what we strive to accomplish.

Let's start by realizing the concept of a Vertex Attribute in C++. For now, we'll naïvely just put each parameter into a struct.

```cpp
struct VertexAttribute {
  GLuint index;
  GLuint size;
  GLenum type;
  GLbyte normalized;
  GLsizei strideSize,
  const GLvoid * offset;
};
```
Not a bad start; however, there are some things that would be slightly awkward to implement:
1. `index` A specific vertex attribute should be agnostic of other surrounding attributes. If this is the case, `index` should probably be assigned or managed by a foreign entity.
2. I'm more a fan of `count` than `size` here as we're referring to a specific enumeration of components within the attribute and not how big or small (in terms of memory usage) the components are individually.
3. The 'type' parameter is pretty interesting. From a C++ perspective, one might want to make this into a template which could take the various GL types (GLfloat, GLint, etc...). We'll just hold on to that idea for now.
4. Normalized is pretty straightforward. GL_TRUE vs GL_FALSE.
5. For `strideSize`, it's similar to point number 1. Each component should be blind to the existence of its surroundings. We'll have something else handle this for us.

The second iteration of this idea would look something along the lines of:


```cpp
template<typename GLType>
struct VertexAttribute {
  GLint count;
  GLenum type;
  GLuint typeSize;
  GLbyte normalized;
};
```

Much easier to manage and populate in my opinion. Naturally, the next thing to address is how these attributes are laid out in memory. We'll refer to this structure as a `layout`. Or simply something like:

```cpp
struct VertexLayout {
  std::vector<VertexAttribute> layout;
};
```

except that we're going to, again, make a few changes...Since we know a priori what our layout should look like, there isn't any reason why we can't make this an array.

```cpp
template<std::size_t NumComponents>
struct VertexLayout {
  std::array<VertexAttribute, NumComponents> layout;
};
```

This is looking like something we can start to easily use. But here's the kicker: We want to be more descriptive up-front of what these vertex attributes are. For example, assume we want a vertex layout that contains: 3D position, 3D normals, and textures. We have three attributes here but a total of eight components (x, y, z, nX, nY, nZ, u, and v). We can use the type sytem to alias what these attributes are for ease of mixing and matching different types of vertices.

```cpp
using vPos3D = VertexComponentGroup<3>;
using vNor3D = VertexComponentGroup<3>;
using vTex = VertexComponentGroup<2>;
```

Using these aliases, we can more easily communicate the structure of the vertices without having to guess what `VertexLayout<8>` means. Something along the lines of `VertexLayout<vPos3D, vNor3D, vTex>` is much easier to identify, and the layout can be determined statically without much work.

Let's try to see what this would look like:

```cpp
template<typename... VertexComponentTs>
struct VertexLayout {
  static constexpr std::array<VertexAttribute, sizeof...(VertexComponentTs)>
      layout{getAttribute<VertexComponentTs>()...};
};
```
Lovely. For all layouts of a given template instantiation, they should be identical, hence `static`. The constexpr here implies `inline` thus we are not required to have the defintion of `layout` in a .cpp file. Thank you C++17.

To populate this array, we expand it from a `VertexAttribute` generator aptly named `getAttribute`.

```cpp
template <typename VertexComponentT>
constexpr auto getAttribute() {
  using value_type = typename VertexComponentT::value_type;
  if constexpr (std::is_same_v<value_type, GLfloat>) {
    return VertexAttribute{VertexComponentT::count,
                           GL_FLOAT,
                           sizeof(value_type), GL_FALSE};
  } else if constexpr (std::is_same_v<value_type, GLint>){
    return VertexAttribute{VertexComponentT::count,
                           GL_INT,
                           sizeof(value_type), GL_FALSE};
  }
  //Use GLfloat as default
  return VertexAttribute{VertexComponentT::count, GL_FLOAT, sizeof(value_type),
                         GL_FALSE};
}
```


The first line in the function body retrives the type of the VertexComponentGroup. For example, `vPos`, `vNor`, and `vTex` will all be GLfloat. If you wanted, you can make a VertexComponentGroup like `vPriority` which contains only `GLint`s that you can use for some ranking system for vertices, etc...Most of the time, I would wager that GLfloat would be used in most attributes. From here you can simply check the type against `GLfloat` and see whether or not if they're the same type using metafunctions/type_traits like `std::is_same`. If we know the type of the attributes, we can simply take the size of that type with `sizeof(value_type)` and use the corresponding `GLenum`.

And with that, we're almost done. We just need to make that `VertexComponentGroup` struct and then add an API to `VertexLayout`.

First, remember that we'd like to call `VertexComponentGroup` this way:

```cpp
using vPos3D = VertexComponentGroup<3>;
```

Obviously, we need to construct a template for this class which accepts at least one template argument (the component count). The other argument will be the type argument named `ValueType` that we used in `getAttribute`.

```cpp
template <std::size_t ComponentCount, typename ValueType>
struct VertexComponentGroup {
  using value_type = ValueType;
  static constexpr std::size_t count = ComponentCount;
};
```

OK. But earlier we didn't specify the type? Correct. We did not. As said before, `GLfloat` is assumed to be our default type unless we're doing something unique like `vPriority`.

Final thing I want to add is the actual API that we will use on the OpenGL interface. We'll simply make this a template function which takes in `VertexComponentGroup`s as arguments. We'll call this Vertex.

```cpp
using vPos3D = VertexComponentGroup<3>;
using vNor3D = VertexComponentGroup<3>;
using vTex = VertexComponentGroup<2>;
using Vertex3D = Vertex<vPos3D, vNor3D, vTex>;
```

I find this to be clear. We have a type called `Vertex3D` which is composed of a 3D position, 3D normal, and a texture coordinates which are composed of three, three, and two components, respectively. Again, you can add, remove, mix this up with a lot of flexibility.

```cpp
template <typename... VertexComponentTs>
struct Vertex {
  static constexpr std::size_t totalComponentCount = (VertexComponentTs::count + ...);
  static constexpr VertexLayout<VertexComponentTs...> layout{};
  static const auto& getLayout() { return layout; }
};
```
Violà. The layout is ready for use for the VAO. One quick note about Visual Studio: `(VertexComponentsTs::count + ...)` wont work until Visual Studio 2019. We can provide quick workaround for that:

```cpp
/*
 * Needed until Visual Studio 2019...
 */
template <typename... VertexComponentTs>
constexpr auto getTotalComponentCount() {
  return (VertexComponentTs::count + ...);
}

//...

template <typename... VertexComponentTs>
struct Vertex {
  static constexpr std::size_t totalComponentCount = 
  		getTotalComponentCount<VertexComponentTs...>();
  static constexpr VertexLayout<VertexComponentTs...> layout{};
  static const auto& getLayout() { return layout; }
};
```

As shown in the second snippet above, we want to use this `layout` member in a range-based for loop without having to say, awkwardly, `layout.layout` (which will return the underlying array of attributes). We can add begin and end iterators to our `VertexLayout` struct and supply a `getStride` member function to give us the total size of all attributes for a given vertex.

```cpp
template <typename... VertexComponentTs>
struct VertexLayout {
  static constexpr std::array<VertexAttribute, sizeof...(VertexComponentTs)>
      layout{getAttribute<VertexComponentTs>()...};
  static GLsizei getStride() {
    return std::accumulate(layout.begin(), layout.end(), 0,
                           [](GLsizei total, const auto& comp) {
                             return total += comp.count * comp.typeSize;
                           });
  }
  static auto begin() { return layout.begin(); }
  static auto end() { return layout.end(); }
};
```


Finally, we can bind our VAO & VBO and add whatever data with our specified layout.

```cpp
  template <typename VBOish, typename VertexLayoutT>
  void addBuffer(const VBOish& vbo, const VertexLayoutT& layout) {
    bind();
    vbo.bind();
    auto offset{0u};
    auto stride = layout.getStride();
    for (const auto& layout_group : layout) {
      glEnableVertexAttribArray(m_arraySize);
      glVertexAttribPointer(m_arraySize, layout_group.count,
                            layout_group.type, layout_group.normalized,
                            stride, reinterpret_cast<GLvoid*>(offset));
      offset += layout_group.count * layout_group.typeSize;
      m_arraySize++;
    }
    vbo.unbind();
    unbind();
  }
```
We've taken care of the `index` and `offset` parameters that were introduced ealier in this post. We can simply pass in a VBO (Vertex Buffer Object--used to provide raw data to the GPU) and a Vertex::layout and we'll just make the right calls to `glVertexAttribPointer` without having to think too much! (maybe)
